\section{Text data}\label{sec:text_data}

\subsection{Topics Evolution}\label{subsec:topics_evolution}

To evaluate the behavior of dynamic clustering under topic distribution shifts,
a subset of the 20Newsgroups dataset~\cite{20newsgroups} was used. Four topical
categories were selected: \texttt{comp.graphics}, \texttt{rec.autos},
\texttt{sci.med}, and \texttt{rec.sport.hockey}, corresponding respectively to
labels $0$, $1$, $4$, and $3$. These topics represent distinct semantic areas
and were chosen to ensure adequate inter-class diversity.

Each document was embedded using the
\texttt{all\allowbreak-MiniLM\allowbreak-L6\allowbreak-v2}
model~\cite{sentence-transformers}, which produces compact and semantically
meaningful vector representations of text. The resulting high-dimensional
embeddings were then reduced to 16 dimensions using UMAP~\cite{umap} to enhance
computational efficiency and preserve cluster structures in a low-dimensional
space suitable for visualization and analysis.

A reference set was formed by sampling a fixed number of documents per topic
(e.g., 100 for \texttt{autos} and \texttt{med}, 50 for \texttt{graphics}).
Then, across eight batches (B1 to B8), topic proportions were deliberately
varied to simulate distribution shifts over time. This batch plan introduces
scenarios such as topic emergence, disappearance, and reappearance. For
instance, \texttt{rec.sport.hockey} (label 3) is entirely absent from the
reference and early batches but gradually increases in presence, peaking in
batch B7. Conversely, \texttt{rec.autos} (label 1) is prominent in the early
stages but vanishes completely in the last three batches.

\begin{table}[H]
      \centering
      \begin{tabular}{lccccccccc}
            \hline
            \textbf{Topic (Label)} & Ref & B1  & B2  & B3  & B4  & B5  & B6  & B7  & B8  \\
            \hline
            \texttt{graphics (0)}  & 50  & 100 & 100 & 50  & 50  & 50  & 0   & 100 & 100 \\
            \texttt{autos (1)}     & 100 & 100 & 100 & 100 & 50  & 50  & 0   & 0   & 0   \\
            \texttt{med (4)}       & 100 & 50  & 0   & 0   & 50  & 50  & 100 & 100 & 50  \\
            \texttt{hockey (3)}    & 0   & 0   & 50  & 100 & 100 & 100 & 150 & 50  & 100 \\
            \hline
      \end{tabular}
      \caption{Batch-wise Sample Distribution (per topic).}
\end{table}

\begin{figure}[H]
      \centering
      \includegraphics[width=1\textwidth]{my_images/experiment_results/text_topics/best_setting/graph.png}
      \caption{Graphical evolution of Text Topics Evolution Experiment.}
\end{figure}